[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
And we are coming to live
from the Gaiam Studios
here in Boulder, Colorado.
And since this is a
live, interactive show,
I encourage you to connect with
us through Facebook, Twitter.
Many of you already are, so
keep the comments and questions
coming in throughout the show.
So what if I told you
there was one thing that
could fight disease, that could
clean up oil spills, that could
even help save
the energy crisis.
Would you believe me?
Would you believe my guest,
award winning mycologist,
Paul Stamets?
Paul has been a dedicated
mycologist for over 30 years.
And over this time, he's
discovered and co-authored
for new species of mushrooms.
And he's pioneered
countless techniques
in the fields of edible and
medicinal mushroom cultivation.
And his mission is to
make a course change
in the evolution of this planet,
which is not a small task.
Welcome to the show.
>>PAUL STAMETS: Thank you, Lisa.
Honor to be here.
>>LISA: It's medicinal
mushroom cultivation.
I got it.
It's quite a task.
So thank you for being here.
How did you get started in this?
What piqued your
curiosity early on?
>>STAMETS: Well,
thinking back, when
I was about five years of age,
I grew up in northern Ohio
on Lake Erie.
And in the summertime,
we had lots of rains.
And these little white puff
ball mushrooms would come up.
And my twin brother
and I discovered
that when we'd throw
them out each other,
they'd explode, the spores.
And so we pelted each other with
puff balls as much as we could.
I remember my mother
coming out and saying,
don't let those spores get
into your twin brother's eyes.
If they do, he'll become blind.
Well, she went back
into the house.
And I thought, that
was good information.
So I pelted my twin brother with
as many puff balls as possible.
But my parents were
not mycophobic, per se.
Mycophobia is the
fear of mushrooms.
And it's really
not-- it makes sense
that that which was so
temporary in nature, that they
sprout seemingly out of nowhere.
They're up for a few days.
And they disappear.
So our time window of
experience with mushrooms
is very short compared to
animals and plants, you know,
where our experiential
window of exposure
goes over for weeks,
months, years.
And so our knowledge
base of those organisms
is much larger naturally.
So mushrooms became
like forbidden fruits.
And I was very much attracted to
the forbidden fruit, you know.
And I thought,
interesting that mushrooms
invoke such passionate
feelings about people.
>>LISA: They do.
>>STAMETS: People are very
rarely neutral about mushrooms.
>>LISA: No.
They're either
terrified of them.
>>STAMETS: Or they
just love them.
>>LISA: Or they love them.
>>STAMETS: And so that's
an interesting dichotomy.
And I like walking the edge
between those two extremes.
>>LISA: Oh, that explains a lot.
Explains why you're
wearing this hat.
You like walking the
edge between the two.
This is an actual mushroom
on your head, isn't it?
>>STAMETS: Yeah.
This hat is actually
made from this mushroom,
which is called amadou.
Now this hat is made by
some ladies in Transylvania.
And it's a tradition
that's been kept alive
for thousands of years.
And this mushroom,
if you hollow it out,
this mushroom was
on birch trees,
on the side of a birch tree.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>STAMETS: And if you
hollow this mushroom out,
our ancestors discovered you
could carry fire for days.
So this is a fire
starter mushroom
that enabled the
portability of fire.
Now is before Bic
lighters, before matches.
>>LISA: How-- in what
forest do you find this?
In what region.
>>STAMETS: It's in the northern
temperate forests throughout
the world, so--
>>LISA: That's I thought.
Because I've walked
through forests
and seen things like
this on the trees.
>>STAMETS: And so you
hollow this mushroom out.
And you put coals
of a fire inside.
And you can cap it.
And you could then, you can
carry fire and then rekindle
it.
Now, there's no doubt that we
all came from Africa 140,000
the 200,000 years ago.
We had two migrations,
one successful, one not.
And we went north.
And we discovered something
new called winter.
Oops.
If your clan could not survive,
because you didn't-- your clan
would not survive if
you didn't have fire.
So the portability of
fire, this mushroom
is absolutely critical
for human survival.
Now in fact, when you boil
this mushroom in hot water,
it delaminates into this fabric.
And it's also known,
some of your listeners
may know it as German felt.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>STAMETS: And it's
a felted product.
And they actually add ashes from
a fire, fireplace, or campfire
into water, and
making lye water.
And then they boil
this mushroom.
It delaminates into
mycelium, which
is this fabric is
made of this fungus.
And the fibers inside
is called mycelium.
And so these hats are highly
flammable, by the way.
>>LISA: Highly flammable.
Do not try this at home.
But how long does that last?
How long will that hat last?
>>STAMETS: Oh, well.
These hats, depending
on-- they're
very water absorbent, so
our ancestors smeared them
with animal grease to
make them waterproof.
But these hats are
incredibly warm.
They're a natural
form of insulation.
And so our ancestors
long ago discovered
that mycelium in hats is
a great form of insulation
and would keep you warm.
And so the hats
will, they will last
as long as you take
care of them well.
But they're somewhat fragile.
>>LISA: So now, of
course the mushroom
we can and is responsible
for the sustainability
of our ecostructure,
basically, in our forests.
And I want you to explain that.
Because I love how passionate
you are about this subject,
and how you open all
of our eyes to things
that we might not know.
So if you could share
with us a little bit,
we have a lot of great
slides that you've
brought with you, which I
appreciate, of how this works.
How does the mushroom
sustain the forest.
>>STAMETS: Well,
mushrooms are fungi.
There are one to
two million species
of fungi in the
kingdom of fungi.
About 10% are mushroom
forming fungi.
Penicillium molds are not
mushroom forming fungi,
they're molds, right.
So 10% of the kingdom of
fungi are a form mushrooms.
About 140,000 species
are estimated,
of which we've only
identified 14,000,
meaning 90% of the species
out there have not yet
been identified.
But these are the
foundations of the food web.
These actually generate soil.
And the consequence
of their activity
creates the
biospheres in the soil
that we are dependent upon.
So these are the soil
magicians of nature.
>>LISA: Exactly
how does that work?
>>STAMETS: Well,
exactly how that works--
>>LISA: Exact-- I mean, many
different types of mushrooms
that you find in the soil.
Does it aerate the soil?
It provides nutrients.
>>STAMETS: Well, they have
an appetite for a decomposing
plant and animal material.
So I always like
to mention that you
should come at peace with
fungi, because they're
going to get you no matter what.
They are the decomposers.
And we become soil
ultimately, as our ancestors
have been, and as nature.
So these are the grand molecular
disassemblers of nature.
What that means is they'll
take a tree or a plant.
And they'll actually unravel
them on a molecular level.
And doing so, they'll
reduce them to then
be nutrients for
many different life
cycles of many other organisms.
And this process of
decomposition brings life.
In Asian culture, mushrooms
are looked upon as rebirth.
And those of us
influenced by the British
primarily look upon mushrooms
as fetid decomposers.
It's a real interesting
yin-yang view of life.
>>LISA: Dichotomy
is interesting.
>>STAMETS: You know.
In Asia, they se these
as rebirthing organisms.
>>LISA: Well, there's a
slide that you have here
that shows that,
that shows really
how it goes deep into the
soil and causes the trees.
And it spreads way deep
beneath the surface.
Let's take a look at that
slide of exactly what we're
looking at here.
Show us.
What is this?
>>STAMETS: Well, this
is a cross section.
And it's the front
cover of my book.
And what people,
and event scientists
do not know this, that
all plants are part fungi.
So they give a host defense of
resistance against diseases.
And so as of today,
just today it
was announced,
that they have now
surveyed the biota of the
microorganisms that make us,
us.
I'm speaking to you, Lisa.
But I am a colony
of microorganisms.
There's 10 trillion
bacterial cells
to one trillion human cells.
Now the bacterial cells
tend to be smaller.
And our cells tend to be larger.
But we're more
bacterial cells than we
are human cells
by number account.
Well, now we know that
we are these consortia
of microorganisms that
are unified together.
And I'm speaking to
you as a community
of microorganisms
with one voice.
But now this is the same
true throughout nature.
Nature's been built upon
community and cooperation.
And these communities
of cooperating organisms
synergistically working
together create a mantle of life
that allows us to evolve,
adapt, and explore.
And that is the way of nature.
>>LISA: Amazing.
So these microorganisms
exist underneath our forests.
And there's specific
fungi that--
>>STAMETS: Right.
There's basically four classes
or groups of mushrooms.
And there are the parasitic
mushrooms that kill trees.
I like to think of
them like wolves
going through a pack
of animals and they
call off the weaker ones.
Well, that increases the
strength of the community
ultimately.
So parasitic fungi kill
weakening plants and trees
and other organisms.
And then there are
the saprophytic fungi
that then grow upon
dead organic material.
And so once
something is rendered
that's no longer alive, then
the saprophytic fungi surge.
And there's thousands
of these fungi.
>>LISA: And they decompose it.
>>STAMETS: And
they decompose it.
And they unlock those
nutrients very, very quickly.
>>LISA: Very interesting.
So that's how they
help with that, OK.
>>STAMETS: And then
the endophytic fungi
is something that's really
come to the forefront,
especially for agriculture
and understanding
how these other fungi
work with within plants.
They actually infuse parallel
to the cells within plants,
in the stems and in the leaves.
And so a tree might have 200 to
500 different endophytic fungi
species within the trees.
And it used to be thought these
little blotches on the leaves
were diseases.
Well, to a large part, most
of those in many cases,
are endophytic fungi that
keep parasitic fungi away.
So the endohytes to
protect the plants--
>>LISA: Protect the trees.
>>STAMETS: From the
parasitic fungi.
So it's in the
plant's best interest
to have a really good
civilization of fungi
to help keep the predators away.
So those are the
endophytic fungi.
And then the
mycorrhizal fungi, I
think most people
have heard about this,
but they extend the
roots zones of plants
literally, literally
no exaggeration,
by thousands of times.
And so the root tips as
they go into the soil,
then there's an
explosion of mycelium
that extends root zones
thousands of fold.
And the mycorrhizal fungi are
not saprophytic typically.
They can't break down wood.
But they're very, very good
at moving minerals to plants.
And in exchange, the roots
give a burst of sugar
to the mycelium.
And then that's their
reward to the mycelium.
And the mycelium rewards
the plants with minerals.
>>LISA: So they transport
the nutrients into the trees.
>>STAMETS: And this is a
huge, huge, huge issue now.
Because there's now--
we've heard of peak oil
but we have peak phosphorus.
And within 40 years,
the prediction
is the fertilizer industry
will collapse around the world.
This is the biggest
threat to the food chain,
besides peak oil and
the fertilizers coming
from all those oil byproducts,
the phosphorus that's
called the
mineralization of rocks,
this is what these fungi do.
They actually eat rocks.
Fungi eat rocks, pulling the
minerals out of the rocks
and giving them to the plants.
So the way of future,
many scientists
believe that the
way of the future
is to reintroduce
the mycorrhizal fungi
and get rid of the
addiction to fertilizer.
It is like a drug
to a drug addict.
We need to go back
to natural systems.
>>LISA: That is interesting.
That is what you are here
and responsible for doing,
is educating us about that.
That's fascinating.
>>STAMETS: One of many, yes.
>>LISA: Yes, many things.
So now the next picture we
have is the actual mycelium.
This is what it looks like
when it comes out of the earth.
And this is that what that web
looks like underneath the--
under the forest floor.
>>STAMETS: Right.
Under my single
footstep, we were
walking around the
woods of Colorado,
there can be more than
300 miles of mycelium.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>STAMETS: They are
thin, thin threads.
Everybody's seen it.
If you haven't seen it, just
go outside where there's
a piece of wood on the
ground and tip it over.
You'll find mycelium,
this white fuzzy stuff.
And gardeners know
it extremely well.
And the mycelium is
virtually everywhere
within the ecosystem.
And the soil layer
that we just upon, it's
extremely thin, just a
few inches to a few feet.
And we live in a very
sensitive biosphere.
And these fungi are the
guardians of the biosphere.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So one of our Facebook
questions that's coming in,
how do we know if this
is poisonous or not.
And you'd be a great
person to answer that.
>>STAMETS: Well, how do we know
which plants are poisonous.
How we know what animals,
like some frogs are edible.
Some frogs are poisonous.
We build upon our
ancestral knowledge.
Fortunately, there's been
a lot of experimentation
by humans in the past.
And the body
intellective knowledge
that we have as a culture,
and for many cultures
we've now build a compendium
of those mushrooms which
we know are edible and
which ones are poisonous.
There are great
mycological societies
of which I'm a member.
There's a nonprofit national
organization called the North
American Mycological
Association.
The website is namyco.org,
N-A-M-Y-C-O dot O-R-G.
And there are mycological
societies where people can join
and learn about which mushrooms
are edible and which ones are
poisonous.
>>LISA: That's great.
You need the app so you could go
around the forest [INAUDIBLE].
The future, bringing
technology to the forest.
All right, so the
next picture we have,
it really shows how
those roots form
and how these mycelium and fungi
go through the forest floor
kind of like in a snake
like pattern, right.
>>STAMETS: Well, the image
you're looking at now
is as a mycorrhizal fungi.
And there is a root of a tree.
The mycelium comes up under
high moisture conditions,
exhales carbon dioxide, just
like us, inhales oxygen.
So these are externalized lungs.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>STAMETS: These are
externalized stomachs.
>>LISA: Of the tree.
>>STAMETS: Yeah,
coming from the roots.
And so it's very-- you know, the
mycelium responds to moisture.
And what most
people don't realize
is most all mushrooms
are photosensitive.
They require light.
So it's totally
opposite of what you've
been told about the bad
jokes which I won't repeat.
I hate mushroom jokes.
I've heard them all.
>>LISA: I'm sure you do.
I recognize you're
sensitive to that.
I'm not going there.
>>STAMETS: Please.
>>LISA: Absolutely not.
I respect that.
>>STAMETS: But most all
mushrooms respond to light.
And it's a signal response
to tell the mycelium
that you're above ground.
And the combination of oxygen
inhalation and light exposure
with moisture causes the
mycelium, which can be resident
in the ecosystem for
hundreds of years
sometimes, then to produce
a mushroom overnight,
then met over a few days.
>>LISA: So what we
see above the soil
has hundreds of miles of
mycelium underneath the soil.
>>STAMETS: Yeah.
The common analogy, which
is pushing it a little bit,
is the roots are to
an apple tree what
the mycelium is to a mushroom.
>>LISA: I understand, yes.
>>STAMETS: So the mushrooms
are the fruit of the mycelium.
>>LISA: This is fascinating.
So this picture that we're
looking at here is a slide.
This is actually the
mycelium under a microscope?
>>STAMETS: Yeah.
This is a scanning electron
micrograph that I took.
And I studied SEM
work for many years
and looked at literally
thousands of specimens.
And I was always amazed at
the network design of mycelium
as it is resistant to change.
And the mycelial's
network design,
if there is a catastrophic
impact and damage or injury,
the mycelium, which is very
different than most organisms.
It actually benefits
from disturbance.
And so when the
mycelium is broken,
it forks and forms spindles.
And so it regenerates.
In fact, mushroom growers
long ago discovered
that even in the button
mushroom industry
when after they have one
or two crops of mushrooms,
if they rake the
beds by disturbance,
the mycelium will re-flourish.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Very resilient.
Very res-- it's interesting.
So they've become the
internet kind of the forest.
>>STAMETS: Yeah, I
proposed in the early 1990s
with my wife in our
many discussions
that the mycelium is
Earth's natural internet.
And I believe the invention
of the computer internet
is an inevitable consequence
of a previously proven
evolutionary model that we
can see in nature today.
We were destined to create
the computer internet
at a time critical for sharing
information and nutrients,
just as the mycelium does
in nature for over hundreds
of millions of years.
>>LISA: As above, so below.
Very interesting.
So this next picture
we have is a picture
of the actual mushroom
growing within in the soil?
>>STAMETS: Well, the
mycelium is very tenacious
when it's grabbing onto wood.
And so it holds the
substrate, as we call it,
together, the wood
particles together.
So the myceliated habitats
are resistant to erosion.
They're spongy habitats,
so they absorb water.
They retain water.
Well, it's obvious then if you
had a soil and a habitat that
retains much more
moisture, that benefits
many other organisms that
are moisture-dependent.
So these are really
the leading edge
to restoration of ecosystems
by not only providing
more nutrients, but they set
the stage of a high moisture
environment that then
benefits many other organisms.
So one of the
coolest things that I
like to take-- people are not
familiar with the subject-
is I take them into
an old growth forest
directly after a rain.
And the scent of the
old growth forest,
that mosaic of
scents, fragrances,
a large part of that
is the out gassing
from the mycelium
underneath your feet.
It's this perfume.
Now our olfactory senses are
not as tuned in as bears,
and dogs, and even many insects.
And so they--
>>LISA: I bet yours is.
Yes.
>>STAMETS: But yeah,
actually it is.
Because we follow scent trails.
And so there are the
invisible fragrance trails
that are emanating
through the woods.
And my wife and I
just the other day,
one of our favorite
mushrooms is matsutake.
And the matsutakes don't come up
until October in the Northwest.
And we were walking
through the woods.
And we smelled matsutake.
And so we memory mapped this
place in the old wood forest
and said we're coming
back here in October.
Because we know that
matsutake's here.
Because we can smell it.
Because the scent
signatures of mushrooms
species tend to be very unique.
I mean, this opens
whole more universe.
>>LISA: Universe.
We have so much to cover.
I know.
So this picture
that we have here
is actually an oyster mushroom.
This is how prolific they are.
They--
>>STAMETS: Oyster
mushrooms are some
of the most common
mushrooms in the world.
They grow virtually in
every woodland habitat.
>>LISA: It's beautiful, really.
>>STAMETS: And it's one the
you buy at the grocery stores,
you know.
It's a mushroom that has a
natural form of lovastatin.
So it actually reduces
your bad cholesterol.
Very interesting studies.
It has very strong anti
E. coli properties.
But really remarkably,
oyster mushrooms
will break down the oil.
They'll break down
petroleum products.
>>LISA: Very important.
>>STAMETS: Now, the mycelium
produces these enzymes.
And they excrete them externally
from the mycelium that you saw.
And these little moisture
droplets that has the enzymes
break down wood.
And wood is composed of
cellulose and lignin.
And these are held together
with carbon hydrogen bonds.
Well, the same enzymes
break the bonds
that hold hydrocarbons together.
And so they break them apart.
And so by a quirk of nature, or
maybe by a design of nature--
>>LISA: Yeah, maybe.
>>STAMETS: Is that
the oyster mushrooms
are remarkable in their ability
of breaking down toxic waste.
>>LISA: So this was fascinating.
When I watched the
Ted talk that you
gave that has had over a
million views on the internet,
when I saw the six ways that
a mushroom can save the world,
this blew my mind.
This is incredible work.
So the mushrooms, they actually
can absorb toxic oil spills,
nuclear waste, all sorts
of different things.
>>STAMETS: Well, in some of
the experiments that we've
done, and now fortunately,
this has been repeated now all
of the world.
Some successes, some failures.
But as we get better at this,
we have more and more successes,
is that we can introduce
oyster mushroom mycelium
into toxic waste fields that
have petroleum products.
And they'll absorb
the oil products.
And they'll denatured them.
And they'll break them down.
Then from an analysis
that we've done,
what we believe, the
operating premise here,
is that we can break
down hydrocarbons
into elemental forms.
And then the fungi
remanufacture them
into fungal carbohydrates,
which are sugars.
So we can take
toxic waste, which
is extremely toxic to most
all organisms, where habitats
are stifled and they're anemic.
And then we can bring
in oyster mushrooms.
And then the oyster mushroom
mycelium breaks it down,
remanufactures it
into fungal sugars.
Bacterial communities
come into play.
Plant communities come back.
And they become a gateway
into ecological restoration,
causing a plurality
of other organisms
to grow grow very, very rapidly.
>>LISA: Absolutely incredible.
And this is a picture here of
exactly how the cell absorbs
the mushroom, and
absorb the oil.
>>STAMETS: Yeah, actually, the
mycelium is white normally.
But the mycelium will go black.
It's like a sponge.
And we worked with
Battelle laboratories
out of Sequim, Washington
for a number of years.
And so my co-authors
and comrade researchers,
we worked on this
for many years.
And we were able to do what's
called proof of concepts
and do mesocosm experiments.
And now we've done
many experiments
outside and in
other environments.
>>LISA: Now could you
actually have enough mushrooms
to consume a massive oil spill?
I mean do they replicate
in this environment?
Or do they decompose
>>STAMETS: Well, that's
a really good question.
You can look at the
economies of scale.
So smaller toxic waste
spills are obviously easier
to remediate than ones.
But we have a lot of unfortunate
examples in the past few years.
So we are strategizing.
And I love a challenge.
And and every time there's been
a major oil spill, et cetera,
I literally get hundreds
and hundreds of emails.
And thankfully, some of these
questions are like, hmm,
you know.
Let me think about that.
And it's something
that I've been
able to come up with
some innovative solutions
that I think will lead the
way into future generations.
Now we had the BP
oil spill recently.
But before that, we had
the Cosco Busan oil spill
in the San Francisco Bay Harbor.
And prior to that, we
had the Exxon Valdez.
>>LISA: These were
massive scale.
>>STAMETS: Massive scales.
And I personally
believe that oil
which is below the skin
of the earth, the soil.
Should just stay there.
When you bring up
things that are
below the skin of the
earth, below the soil,
they tend to be toxic.
And we live on this thin
membrane that gives us life.
And bringing this
stuff up, we have
some real needy challenges.
So I've been breaking
down oil spills on land
for a number of years
with other researchers
and other researchers in Europe.
And so after the BP oil spill,
I had literally hundreds
of people write me,
what would you do?
And so I came up
with myco booms.
And the idea is the mycelium
on [? straw ?] are sawdust.
And since they're using booms
to corral the oil anyhow,
why not use a floating boom
of mycelium to corral the oil.
It produces enzymes that starts
the disintegration of the oil.
And you can corral it.
And the booms then do
not have to be picked up,
because they're biodegradable.
So this, I think, is a better
way than just using a boom,
is you can corral, absorb,
and decompose, or start
the process of decomposition.
Now the scientists
in the audience,
I want to be very
clear about this,
these are called polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons.
These are long chains
of hydrocarbons.
The really big,
complex chains are
extremely hard to break down.
The simple ones, there are
two or three hydrocarbons
stuck together.
Bacteria can break down.
What these fungi are
really good at doing
is taking the really
big hydrocarbons
in a stepwise fashion, reducing
them into smaller ones.
The smaller hydrocarbons,
then there's
other organisms in
the environment.
Then they can come into play.
So these are
gateway species that
create a cascading influence
towards bioremediation.
>>LISA: And I saw very specific
part of that picture, where
the mushrooms were actually
extending beyond the band
that you had there and
growing outside of it.
So therefore,
that's where you're
talking about that cascading
effect happening, right.
>>STAMETS: Right.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
That's great.
So this is something that
I feel is groundbreaking.
This is something that I see
has massive implications, where
it comes to our
survival of our species
and the survival of this planet.
Well, you've created
something that
has incredible
implications of survival.
>>STAMETS: Well, I mean we
build upon the knowledge
of our ancestors.
And I'm carrying the torch
in this generation perhaps.
But it's soon to be passed
to the next generation.
And I think we have a gateway
to many restoration strategies
using fungi as the first
step in this process that
enables a lot of other methods
to be able to work even better.
>>LISA: What about for nuclear
and toxic effects like that?
>>STAMETS: Well, that's
an excellent example.
And from these catastrophes,
we have teaching lessons,
not ones that we wanted.
>>LISA: No, right.
Harsh lessons.
>>STAMETS: But they occur.
So let's try to figure
out what we can do.
But after Chernobyl,
a group of researchers
at Einstein University
looked at remote cameras
going into Chernobyl.
Well, a million rads
of radioactivity.
And in the containment
vessel of Chernobyl,
they found black molds
growing all over the walls.
And these molds worry subjected
to high radioactivity.
And they discovered something
unknown previously to science,
that fungi that produce melanin,
like we have in our skin,
use radiation in a form
similar to the way plants
use light to photosynthesize.
Now this, we have a new way of
metabolism that these fungi.
Now this could have
huge implications
for the interplanetary
colonization of space.
We can grow fungal foods using
the radioactive gamma particles
that are coming
from the engines.
And we cannot total greenhouses
through the vacuum of space.
>>LISA: Well, I want
you to hold right there,
because that's an amazing point.
I want you to spend
some time on that point.
We're going to take a quick
break and come right back
and understand how these
mushrooms can really
support our entire
ecological system, as well
as our immune system.
We'll find out when we come
back with Paul Stamets.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Welcome back.
My guest is Paul Stamets.
He is a mycologist.
And we're talking about
these incredible mycelium
and how they can actually
absorb toxic waste.
We were talking about that
a little before the break.
If you can continue on that
thought, what did you call it?
Colonization of space?
>>STAMETS: Well, because
of my TED connections,
I was invited to Googleplex.
And at [? sifu ?] camp
would have been 140 thinkers
together, Nobel
laureates, et cetera.
I had the pleasure of meeting
the commander of the Mars
Mission Project.
Six months to get the Mars,
one year on the planet,
six months to get back.
I asked, what's the biggest
concern that you have?
And they said, by far,
feeding the astronauts.
How do we carry that much food?
We can't.
We have to grow it.
I said, well, how are
you going to grow it?
They said, well, we think
about towing greenhouses.
I'm In the vacuum of space?
Greenhouses?
How are you going to heat
them, all these things.
And so what this discovery
from this accident at Chernobyl
has shown us is that these
fungi can be grown on minerals
and using radioactivity
as a fuel source,
like plants use light
for photosynthesis,
we can generate sugars
from fungi eating rocks
and end up growing
tempe-like foods.
And then when we
get to Mars, then we
could begin mycoterra
forming We could
begin to terraform the planet
using these fungi that we bring
to start using the
minerals and breaking down
to feed the plants,
like we talked about
for the mycorrhizal fungi.
And then we can then support
the plant communities
without having to bring
over fertilizer, et cetera.
So this really is a
huge potential avenue
that historically may be looked
upon in the future, looking
back, as one of the
nexus points of discovery
that could enable the
colonization of other planets
by humans, from the
accident at Chernobyl.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Fascinating.
I can see how you
have completely
fallen in love with
these creatures.
>>STAMETS: Every day I'm
a kid scientist still.
Every day I wake up,
it's like, what's next.
>>LISA: Of course, of course.
I want you to take a
look at this video that's
absolutely beautiful display
of these fantastic fungi.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>STAMETS: Mushroom
mycelium represents
rebirth, rejuvenation,
regeneration.
Fungi generates soils
that gives life.
The task that we face
today is to understand
the language of nature.
My mission is to discover
the language of nature
of the fungal networks that
communicate with the ecosystem.
And I believe nature
is intelligent.
The fact that we lack the
language skills to communicate
with nature does not
impugn the concept
that nature's intelligent.
It speaks to our inadequacy
for communication.
If we don't get our act
together and come in commonality
in understanding
with the organisms
that sustain us today,
not only will we
destroy those organisms, but
we will destroy ourselves.
We need to have a paradigm
shift in our consciousness.
What will it take
to achieve that?
If I die trying, but I'm
inadequate to the task
to make a course change
in the evolution of life
on this planet, OK.
I tried.
The fact is, I tried.
How many people are not trying?
If you knew that
every breath you
took could save hundreds
of lives into the future
had you walked down
this path knowledge,
wouldn't you run down
that path of knowledge
as fast as you could?
I believe nature
is a force of good.
Good is not only a
concept, it is a spirit.
And so hopefully, the spirit
of goodness will survive.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Absolutely amazing.
Absolutely amazing.
They are absolutely
beautiful creatures.
So we were talking about how
the mycelium could actually
absorb nuclear waste.
So how could this help
something like Fukushima?
>>STAMETS: Well, Fukishima,
again after thees disasters,
I seem to be the
receiver of hundreds
of emails on what you do?
And it's a very
complicated situation.
Now my father was a nuclear
engineer, a nuclear scientist.
And we argued about
a lot of things.
I protested against
nuclear power plants.
But my dad, you
know, said one thing
that haunts me to this day.
He's now passed.
And he said, no
matter what, you don't
want to keep nuclear waste
adjacent to an operating
nuclear power
plant, should there
be a runaway nuclear reaction.
The waste fuel, then
could fuel that reaction.
I went oh, my gosh.
I agree with my dad totally.
But in no nuclear
manual did they ever
consider the combination
of an earthquake
with a tsunami with a meltdown.
Well, we know that
that does occur.
It will occur into the future.
So after Chernobyl,
there was this mushroom
that hyper-accumulated
cesium-137
from radioactive fallout.
And the Ukrainian scientists
went out in the forest,
because a lot of the Ukrainians
were all wild food gatherers.
And they were
concerned about them
getting radiation exposure.
So they analyzed on the downwind
environment from Chernobyl
what foods were safe to eat
and which ones were not.
They found something
really bizarre.
One mushroom
hyper-accumulated cesium-137
more than 10,000 times
the background levels.
Now a mush-- a mycelium.
but up channel, the
radioactive metal from fallout
moved by the mycelium,
and the mushroom
became highly radioactive.
Now why would this do this?
Now I philosophically
look at this
as the skill sets
of this species
and the biodiversity
of fungi in the forest
called microdiversity.
Every species has
certain sets of skills
that can help repair
the environment
to guarantee the plurality of
the organisms that give rise
to the trees, that create debris
fields that feed the fungi.
So these have a long view.
And that complexity
of the biosphere
is extremely important.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
>>STAMETS: When we
lose biodiversity,
we lose a lot of species that
have talents that we didn't
even know that we need until
a disaster like this occurs.
So around Fukushima, when
I proposed a nuclear forest
exclusion zone, we make it
into an old growth forest,
or the Japanese would,
for hundreds of years.
Now you would then selectively
go in under hazmat conditions.
And you would pull out
the radioactive mushrooms.
>>LISA: Mushrooms, right.
>>STAMETS: And you would
then in a stepwise fashion
reduce the amount
of radioactivity
over the long term.
This is not going
to take a decade.
It's not going to 100 years.
It's going to take
hundreds of years.
And in the course
of that, you'll
have an old growth
forest grow up.
>>LISA: But what you do with
the radioactive mushrooms?
>>STAMETS: Then would
incinerate them.
No one's going to complain
about burning mushrooms.
And you can recapture
the radioactive metals,
which they do already with
scrubbers and incineration.
They can recapture
the metals now,
because they've
been concentrated
into the mushrooms.
The big issue is, how do you
get it out of the environment?
>>LISA: Right, right, right.
You
>>STAMETS: Can't scoop up
30 square miles of soil.
Where are you going to put it?
You can't dump it in the ocean.
You actually can't
incinerate it.
And so by having these
hyper-accumulators,
detoxify the surrounding
environment, hyper-toxifies
a mushroom, which
then it allows it
to be portable to pull it
out of the environment.
So we're going to--
I think this should
be taught within schools.
It's going to have to
become part of the body
intellect of the Japanese
educational system, where
generations of people realize
that this old growth forest is
a testimonial to human
ignorance and not
anticipating that you have an
earthquake and tsunami that
created a nuclear meltdown.
And we'll have more
Fukushimas in the future.
Bear witness to that.
I'm sure it's going happen.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Fascinating.
So you actually hold
a solution there,
which a lot of people--
and I'm so glad that you
talk about this and
that your message
is getting communicated
to so many people.
Because this is vital.
Absolutely.
So now, we reduce this
entire conversation
down to pest control.
Not that its' a bad thing,
but you can actually
use the mushroom
to control pests
in-- this is something
else that you've
turned this entire industry
on its head, the pest control
industry, by creating
a new patent of how
these mushrooms could actually
control unwanted pests that
destroy structures in your home.
>>STAMETS: I'm so
grateful to be the bearer
of this knowledge
and this discovery.
But let me give credit to
hundreds of other mycologists
who spent all their
lifetime working on this.
And I discovered something
different, that-- and this
is not my specialty.
But I now have received
five patents and soon two
more that are revolutionary.
The US Patent Office
gave me these patents
that are useful
against all insects
without restriction to species.
This is something called the
Alexander Graham Bell patent.
It is so vast in
its implication.
>>LISA: It is.
>>STAMETS: Now to bring
this into context,
everyone's seen
ants walking around.
And they're constantly
cleaning themselves,
is because the soil
is full of what
these fungi that kill them.
They're called
entomopathogenic fungi-- entomo
meaning insect, pathogenic.
And so these
entomopathogenic fungi
are constantly trying to
grab hold of the insects
and infect them.
So the insects are constantly
cleaning themselves.
And so it's a deadly dance
between dinner and death,
as they migrate around
the environment.
And I discovered a way of taking
these fungi, and I morph them.
I shut down sporulation, so
they're no longer infectious.
And it's like a Trojan horse.
And then the insects,
rather than trying
to clean themselves,
they want to eat it.
And they carry around.
>>LISA: They consume it, OK.
>>STAMETS: And virtually every
ant nest, every termite nest,
in the world has these
fungi growing naturally.
So it's not amplifying
foreign species.
These fungi are literally
underneath every footstep.
And it's called endogenous
Metarhizium, is the genus.
And it's literally
the most common,
some of the most common,
fungi in the world in soils.
It's everywhere.
And so I have these
now patents which
I have not commercialized them.
I've met with the EPA.
But this could be totally
displace the pesticide industry
and petrochemical dependence
of the industry in a way that
uses a nature based solution,
which I've just advanced sort
of the evolution of nature
a great step forward.
And so I'm using natural--
>>LISA: By [INAUDIBLE] the
pesticides, and the chemicals,
and the harshness
of-- yeah. [INAUDIBLE]
>>STAMETS: I'm able to
do to tweak the life
cycle in the laboratory.
So I got a temporary window
that would not occur in nature.
But I'm able to extend
the mycelial state
without the reproductive
state of the spores.
And the spores turn out to
be repellent to the insects.
They're not stupid.
They can smell the plague
when they get near it.
Just like you open
up your refrigerator
and you smell moldy, mold,
in your refrigerator.
You're repelled by it.
Well, the insects re
hypersensitive to the spores.
And I discovered that if
you suppress sporulation,
then the opposite
effects happen,
is the insects
want to consume it.
>>LISA: And so when they
consume it, what happens?
>>STAMETS: Well, this is where
a subject of great debate.
We've had tremendous results
against mosquitoes, against bed
bugs, against termites,
against fire ants.
This is why I proved it
about 12 different species.
And the patent office says, OK.
Now you've made it obvious.
And if there's one sentence
in Hungarian, and Chinese,
and Japanese that stated this
in the scientific literature
or elsewhere, I would not
have gotten these patents.
So the patent office was
very reluctant to give me
these patents.
Because now they gave
me basically all insects
without restriction to species.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>STAMETS: The good news
is these don't kill bees.
But they kill the mites, the
Varroa mites, that kill bees.
>>LISA: That kill the bees, yes.
>>STAMETS: And so now they're
doing experiments and putting
these fungi with bees,
beehives, to limit the mites
and the devastating
effect they have on those.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
So then the [INAUDIBLE], this
of course, consumes their body.
And we have a picture of this.
And it takes over the actual--
>>STAMETS: Yeah.
And this is what's called
a dimorphic fungus.
So it's got two faces,
like of the same coin.
It's got a mold state, like
a little fuzzy mycelium,
and then it's got
a mushroom state,
and boing, a
mushroom will pop out
of their head in many,
many of these species.
And it's called Cordyceps.
Cordyceps is and
immunosuppressant mushroom.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STAMETS: And so
these mushrooms,
a lot of these species, produce
a Cordyceps mushroom fruit
body.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
So that's how that happens.
So basically, there
are-- a listener
who's asking these very,
very good questions.
Can mushrooms
possibly go extinct?
And you have
something that you've
created that
enables people to be
able to grow mushrooms
in their home.
Kids can do this.
And they can basically
take this and put it
into the forest
behind their house.
And they can continue to
propagate the species.
>>STAMETS: Well, yeah, I--
>>LISA: We have that right here.
>>STAMETS: Well,
this is-- again,
I've been a kid scientist ever
since I was born, it seems.
This took forever to produce.
But this is my LifeBox.
And inside the
corrugations of the box,
inside these little flutes,
are about 200 to 300 seeds
of trees with mycorrhizal fungi.
So we're going full circle
here to the beginning
of this interview, with
the beneficial fungi
in association with the seeds.
And so we wrote every
department of agriculture
in the United States
to get approval.
And so these are
non-invasive trees.
They may not be native.
And people go well, if
they're not native, well,
that's not good.
Well, no garden vegetable
in your garden is native.
>>LISA: So they'll grow anyway.
>>LISA: Yeah, so they'll grow.
But through natural selection,
like in the drier environments,
we have dry land cotton
woods and dry land pines.
And so they'll survive in
a dry land environment.
And then in New England
and the Northwest,
we have Douglas
firs and hemlocks
that will grow better
in that environment.
So first we want to be able
to produce the LifeBox, which
can regenerate forests.
And there's no extra
weight in the box.
UPS, FedEx, the post
office, they already
have a delivery system
to the consumer.
And so my idea is to reinvent
the packaging industry
with LifeBoxes.
This is our forest LifeBox.
We have a vegetable
LifeBox also in production.
And then you basically, every
box, then you tear it up.
And you plan it.
And a little forest
of trees comes up.
And then you have
two years to put
these trees outside
on some land.
And then by GPS coordinates,
when you plant the trees,
you can then, with Google
Earth or other mapping systems,
designate where you planted
the trees with your GPS
coordinates.
You create the
family tree program.
And you designate these
trees as part of your family,
so it could be a
[? LEESIS ?] family tree.
And as these trees
ascend and become larger,
then future generations
knew that you
cared about climate change.
And perhaps you
can have a picnic
under a tree in the future
that came from a LifeBox.
>>LISA: Well, that answers your
question, Roger from Facebook.
Because this is an
absolutely incredible thing.
So anyone can do this.
You take this.
It decomposes.
You add water to it.
It grows mushrooms.
And then you just put
them into wherever
your closest region is.
>>STAMETS: Yeah, there
are truffle like mushrooms
are associated inside these.
And we can elaborate
this in many ways.
I can add chanterelle
spores, or matsutake
spores, or shaggy mane spores.
And so we can make
these as a form
of ecological or
mycological footprints
that we can then establish
our favorite edible mushrooms
within the forests that
come from LifeBoxes.
That way you're hunting
mushrooms in the wild,
why not just put your
wild collected mushrooms
inside the box.
And the spores then
will go in the box.
And then you plant this outside.
And then the mushroom
spores will then
associate with the
roots of the trees.
And then when you
plant those trees out,
you've created a medicinal
or gourmet mushroom forest
in the process of
using a LifeBox.
>>LISA: Absolutely amazing.
>>STAMETS: So you
can customize it.
>>LISA: You can.
So now then they grow into
something that's huge.
And you have an
example here that you
brought with you of what
these mushrooms look like when
they get to be
absolutely massive.
Now this isn't going
to necessarily happen
from a LifeBox.
But show us what
you brought here.
This is a little show and
tell segment for everybody
to take a look at.
>>STAMETS: This is my--
>>LISA: Look at
the size of that.
>>STAMETS: My finest
fungal friend,
if I could honor
it with that name.
This is an extremely
rare mushroom
called a [? gericon. ?]
And now it is now
thought to be extinct in Europe.
It only grows in the old growth
forest of Washington state,
or Oregon, Northern California,
and British Colombia.
And this mushroom is the longest
living mushroom in the world.
>>LISA: Not this particular
one, but this species.
>>STAMETS: Yeah, this one
is about 40 years of a age.
And this mushroom grows at the
top of old Douglas fir trees
and spruce trees
exposed to the wind,
exposed to the ice storms,
and severe weather, oftentimes
exposed to the sun.
Yet it does not rot for
more than 100 years.
And so I looked at
this mushroom long ago
and wondering what is it about
this mushroom that gives it
the ability to defend
itself against pathogens.
And maybe we could learn
something from that.
So I made a my lifelong quest,
one out of 40 or 50 times going
into the old growth forest,
and I'm skilled at this,
will I find one of these.
I have now 44
strains in culture.
We have the largest
culture library
of this [? garicon ?]
mushroom in the world.
And my intuition proved out
to be very good on this,
because we found that
within this mushroom--
I became involved with
the BioShield program
with the US Defense
Department after 9/11.
And I submitted
over 600 samples.
And lo and behold, it turns
out our most powerful samples,
the most powerful samples
the BioShield program ever
saw of any of their samples
against pox viruses,
including smallpox,
and flu viruses
came from our cultures
of this mushroom.
>>LISA: You're kidding?
They have antiviral properties?
>>STAMETS: Antiviral,
antibacterial properties.
And to find something that's
dually active against viruses
and bacteria--
>>LISA: Absolutely, yeah.
>>STAMETS: Is medically unique.
Well, we found out that
there is a deep treasure
trove of new molecules
unknown to science.
And we've identified now a
group of compounds highly active
against bird flu.
And the bad news, folks.
We live in our houses in
our short little lifetime.
The bad news is we
are experiencing
a massive extinction event
right now all around us.
And as environments
are polluted,
as there is overcrowding
from factory farms of pigs
and other animals and chickens,
as human populations increase,
as water quality declines,
and habitat health declines,
the rule of nature
is you have disease.
And so [INAUDIBLE]
diseases are going
to be springing out of nature.
And most scientists now
who study the subject
are now predicting that
we'll have viral storms, just
like we have weather storms.
We're going to
have viral storms.
And whether it's a--
>>LISA: We see incidences
of this with the flu
epidemics that we see.
>>LISA: The flu H1N1 came
out of a pig farm in Mexico.
>>LISA: Right.
Wow.
>>STAMETS: I was
interviewed several times.
And myself and other researchers
said, this is going to happen.
And it did happen.
Now, we missed the bullet
because it turned out
to be highly contagious, but not
very pathogenic comparatively.
We now, it doesn't matter
whether it's a bioterrorist
or it comes from nature, because
now the mathematical models
have shown that
it's probable now.
Because there's so
many opportunities
of the remixing of
these flu viruses
that are in birds,
pigs, and humans.
And we co-mingle.
I was really concerned after
Fukushima with the tsunami,
you had dead bodies.
You had people, pigs, and birds
all in this big liquid soup.
>>LISA: So the viruses--
>>STAMETS: And the viruses
could evolve out of it.
They may still indeed evolve.
>>LISA: Still happen.
>>STAMETS: So
finding these fungi
and then I posed to the
US Defense Department
that therefore, we should
save the old growth
forests as a matter
of national defense.
>>LISA: Oh, my gosh.
>>STAMETS: And I was really
happy with the response.
>>LISA: Really?
>>STAMETS: They were
100% behind that.
This is what Americans
need to know,
is the US Defense Department
does not care that
much about politics.
Of course, the upper
management does.
But the people that are involved
in the US Defense Department
are concerned about protection
of human health and animal
health.
And since viruses
know no borders,
they're concerned about the
protection of global health.
So the global health
initiatives now, a lot of them,
the key officials in the
US Defense department,
are looking about and looking
at environmental integrity.
If you keep the
environment healthy,
you keep the food chains
healthy, you feed people,
you don't have poverty.
You don't have disease.
You don't have terrorism.
They're all consequential
of a decimated ecosystem.
So the happier the
ecosystem is, we're
a reflection of
that environment,
the happier societies
generally going to be,
because they have ample
resources for food and health.
>>LISA: So protecting
these old growth
forests are a matter
of national defense.
That's a very strong statement.
>>STAMETS: I absolutely
believe this.
And I can make the argument,
I think, with anyone.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>STAMETS: Believe it or not,
I have conservative friends.
And they've told me
well, we couldn't
get behind the spotted owl,
but we can get behind this one.
I go, OK.
>>LISA: I agree.
So now these actually contain
the antiviral and antibacterial
properties.
Can you take these in
terms of a supplement form
for immune system support?
Can you take them as a
preventative measure?
>>STAMETS: Yeah.
One of the areas I'm
segue waying into
is insects carry diseases.
Like mosquitoes carry
West Nile virus, right.
So they're called
zoonotic diseases.
Animals that carry diseases
to humans or to other animals,
are called zoonotic diseases.
Well, we found
that this mushroom
has very strong
anti-herpes effects.
>>LISA: That's an incurable.
>>STAMETS: Well, and herpes,
it falls into a category called
oncoviruses, viruses
that can cause cancer.
Now we know about hep
C causing liver cancer.
We know about HPC
causing cervical cancer.
So the viral to cancer
bridge is quite strong,
and increasingly strong.
Over 20%, around
20% of all cancers
have a viral component,
or a precursor
that precipitates that cancer.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STAMETS: Nature's
a numbers game.
And so, yes.
These mushrooms--
unfortunately, many ways
are considered grass,
generally regarded
as safe, because of the
2,000 year history of use.
This mushroom was first
reported by Dioscorides
in 65 AD, 2,000 years, ago, as
a treatment against consumption,
which later was thought to
be known as tuberculosis.
So this mushroom has
antibacterial properties,
tuberculosis is a bacterium,
and antiviral properties.
So this bolsters your
host defensive resistance
to be able to resist disease.
And so this mushroom
is very important,
I think, in reducing
oncoviruses and another viruses.
>>LISA: So we have some
pictures of these in the forest.
This is Dusty, your wife,
holding one of them from one
of the branches.
This is you holding
this very mushroom here,
which is phenomenal.
Now let's talk a little bit
about the mushrooms that
are the turkey tail mushrooms.
And we have a picture of these.
And they're quite
vibrant in color.
Tell us a little
bit about those.
>>STAMETS: Well, the
turkey tail mushrooms
are the old name,
the scientific name,
was called coriolus versicolor.
And they are multi-colored.
And the new name is
trametes versicolor.
The Chinese knew it as yun zhi.
And versicolor because it's
variable in color, good name.
It's nice when you
have a Latin name that
make sense, versicolor.
But it's been well known
in Asia and reported
to help the immune system.
And so about five years
ago, we were funded,
our group was funded, by
the National Institute
of Health for a $2.2 million
breast cancer clinical study.
The clinical study has
just been published,
and using turkey tail mushroom
mycelium as an adjunct therapy
to conventional therapy to help
the immune system of breast
cancer patients recover.
It shows a very
positive response.
And now we have
a nutraceutical ,
this can be bought at the
local health food stores,
that can empower
the immune system.
Because doctors are
very good at surgery.
We have radiation therapy.
We have chemo.
But they have nothing for
the immune system, and so--
>>LISA: Right.
It's absolutely essential.
>>STAMETS: And so the
turkey tail mushrooms
help rebound the immune
system on a stepwise basis,
on a dose dependent basis.
You're taking two pills, four
pills, eight pills per day.
You can see a direct
measurement of the increase
in immune response, not
only by the numbers,
and so any doctors
listen to this,
they're natural killer
cells, not only is there
more natural killer cells,
but the killer cells
become educated, overcoming
immune evasion of the tumors,
which can evade
the immune system
and then the
natural killer cells
achieve immune invasion, where
they can invade the tumor
cells, and like little
Pac-mans, they break them apart.
>>LISA: Very important.
>>STAMETS: So this is
the operating hypothesis
that's been seen now.
And--
>>LISA: You have a
personal story about this.
I want the listeners to watch
this personal story of yours.
Take a look from one
of your TED Talks here.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>STAMETS: In June, 2009, when
my 84-year-old mother called me
up and says, Paul.
I have something very
serious to talk to you about.
But you're always so busy.
It's a terrible thing
to hear from Mom.
I said, Mom, what's wrong?
And she's a very
happy, genuine person.
And she goes, I'm worried.
And my mother's deeply
religious and has not
seen a doctor since 1968.
She said, my right breast is
five times the size of my left.
I have six swollen lymph
glands the size of walnuts.
And her voice start shaking.
And I'm not ashamed to
admit that I started crying.
Why didn't you tell me sooner?
We spent a large part of June
at the Swedish Breast Cancer
Clinic in Seattle.
The oncologist examined her
and upon second examination,
she had a 5.5 centimeter
diameter tumor.
It metastasized.
It went to her sternum.
It went to her liver.
She had stage four
breast cancer.
The doctor gave her less
than three months to live
and stated it was the second
worst case of breast cancer
she has seen as a doctor
in 20 years of practice.
We had the circle
family meeting.
Many of you have
gone through this.
My mom announced that she bought
a pine casket, the cheapest
one that she could find,
because she was going to heaven.
But then the doctor
said, you know.
You're too old to have
radiation therapy.
You can't have your
breasts removed.
But there's an interesting
study on turkey tail mushrooms
at [? Bastyr ?] Medical School.
You might want to
try taking those.
And that's-- my mother goes,
well my son's supplying those.
So she was put on Taxol and
Herceptin, wonderful drugs.
And then she started
taking eight turkey tail
capsules a day,
four in the morning
and four in the evening.
And that was in June, 2009.
And today, my mother has
no detectable tumors.
And I'd like to thank my mother.
[APPLAUSE]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Absolutely,
absolutely amazing.
You did an amazing thing there.
>>STAMETS: Thanks.
>>LISA: Paul, you did
an incredible thing
for yourself, and
for many people.
When I saw that, I started
emailing my friends who I do
know that are struggling
with cancer right now
and telling them about this.
And so why is this not
more readily available,
more widely known?
>>STAMETS: Well it's
becoming more widely known.
Most physicians are clueless,
because they have not
heard of the research.
They have not studied it.
There's an article that
came out in The Lancet
in 1994 with gastric
kind of cancer.
And it showed an increase
in life span in combination
with chemotherapy.
No one's recommending these in
place of conventional therapy.
These are adjunct,
to help to tilt--
>>LISA: Boost the immune system.
>>STAMETS: The balance in
favor of immune recovery.
And so a lot of doctors
are looking at this now.
We have a-- this study was just
published in "The International
Journal of Oncology"
in this past week.
And so now the phase one
study has been published.
And now we're on to phase two.
>>LISA: Absolutely amazing.
>>STAMETS: So I think lots
of people could benefit from
eating mushrooms
as a preventive,
as well as subsequently, so--
>>LISA: Yes.
You've done an
incredible job today
to show us how these incredible
mycelium and the fungi
could clean up oil spills,
can boost immune system,
can save us from
natural disasters,
and our old growth forests be
a matter of national defense.
They're absolutely amazing.
And I'm so glad that you're
here to share this with us.
Thank you so much, Paul.
You've been a source, a
resource, of information today.
Thank you so much
for everything.
>>STAMETS: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: I appreciative it.
And thank you so
much for watching.
If you want to watch a replay of
my interview with Paul Stamets,
or if you want to share
it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com for a lot more
thought provoking interviews,
and inspirational
films, and so much more.
Sign up for a free
trial of gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]